---
layout: distill
title: "Translation of the Wanderer"
description: "My amateur translation of the Old English poem"
tags:
date: 2019-07-13
featured: false
usemathjax: true

authors:
  - name: William Merrill
    url: "/"
    affiliations:
      name: AI2

bibliography:

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
# toc:
#   - name: Introduction

---

*You can find the original Old English [here](http://www.anglo-saxons.net/hwaet/?do=get&type=text&id=wdr).*

Often the outcast  
awaits his grace,  
the Lord's mercy,  
though he, sorrow-minded,  
must turn his oars  
along the waters,  
wade the path of exile.  
Fate goes always as it must!  

So spoke the earth-stepper,  
mindful of his misfortunes,  
of wrathful slaughter,  
the death of his comrades:  

Often in the morning,  
I had to discuss  
my every trouble alone.  
There is no one living  
that I dare open my innermost thought to.  
Truly I know  
that it ought to be among men,  
the noble custom,  
where one secures the chest of his spirit,  
hordes his treasure case,  
thinks and speaks freely.  
The weary spirit cannot  
withstand fate,  
nor does the bitter mind  
help do any good.  
So the glory-yearning  
often lock away their dreary  
thoughts in their breast-coffins.  
So I,  
often wretched  
and besorrowed,  
have had to seal away  
my thoughts from kinsmen,  
since, long ago,  
I sealed my lord  
in the darkness of the earth  
and from there travelled  
winter-minded  
over the frozen waves,  
sought, hall-lacking,  
a treasure-giver,  
wherever far or near  
I might find someone  
in the meadhall  
who knew me,  
or was willing to console  
me, the friendless one,  
wow me with wonders.  

He who has known it understands  
how cruel sorrow is as a companion  
for the one who has  
few beloved friends.  
Exile wraps him,  
not rings of gold,  
a frozen spirit,  
not the prosperity of the earth.  
He remembers hall-warriors  
and ring-givers,  
how his gold-giver  
treated him to feasting  
in his youth.  
How all that joy has died!  
And so he knows this,  
he who must for a long time  
forgo the counsel of his  
dear lord,  
when sorrow and sleep together  
wrap him up and bind him.  
He dreams in his head  
that he hugs and kisses  
his lord,  
and on his lord's knee  
lie his hand and head,  
just as he, at times  
in days gone by,  
enjoyed the gift throne.  
Then he wakes back up  
a lordless man,  
he sees before him  
dusky waves,  
sea birds bathing,  
pruning their feathers,  
frost and snow falling,  
mixed in with hail.  
Then are that much heavier  
the wounds of his heart,  
grieving after his lord.  
His sorrow is renewed  
when his mind happens upon  
the memory of his kinsmen.  
He greets them with joy,  
eagerly looks over  
the gathering of men -  
but they always swim away.  
The journey of sailors  
never brings back many  
known stories.  
Grief is renewed  
for him who must  
always send his  
weary heart  
over the binding of the waves.  

Therefore I can't think  
why my heart does not  
darken when I reflect  
on all the lives of men  
throughout this world,  
how they suddenly  
left the hall floor,  
those proud thanes.  
So each day this Middle Earth  
crumbles and decays.  
Therefore a man cannot become  
wise before he has a share  
of winters in the world.  
A wise man must be patient,  
must not be too reckless,  
nor too word-hasty  
nor too weak a warrior,  
nor too rash,  
neither too fearful nor cheerful,  
nor too greedy of goods,  
and never too eager for boasting  
before he truly understands.  
A man must wait  
when he speaks oaths  
until the bold one  
truly knows  
where his heart's intent  
will turn.  
A wise hero must realize  
how ghastly it will be  
when all the wealth of this world  
lies waste,  
as now in various places  
around this earth,  
walls stand  
blown by wind,  
covered in snow,  
storm-wrecked ruins.  
The halls decay,  
their leader lies dead,  
deprived of joy.  
The whole troop  
has proudly fallen by the wall.  
Some war took them,  
carried them on their way.  
One, a bird snatched off  
over the deep sea.  
Another, the grey wolf  
tore apart after his death.  
Another, buried  
dreary-faced  
in his grave.  
And so He destroyed this place,  
the Creator of men,  
until missing the noise  
of its residents,  
the old work of giants  
stood idle.  

He who wisely reflected  
on this ruin,  
and deeply pondered  
this dark life,  
wise in experience,  
distantly remembered  
much slaying,  
and spoke these words:  

Where is the horse? Where is the rider?  
Where is the treasure-giver?  
Where are the hall's joys?  
Alas, the bright cups!  
Alas, the warrior in mail!  
How that time has departed,  
dark under night's helm,  
as if it never were.  
Now stands as a trace of  
the dear warband  
a wonderously high wall,  
snakingly woven.  
The warriors have been snatched away  
by the honor of spears,  
slaughter-seeking weapons,  
that famous fate,  
and storms clash against  
these stone cliffs,  
falling frost  
grips the earth,  
the clamor of winter.  
Then darkness comes;  
night's shadow deepens.  
From the north approaches  
a rough hail storm,  
hostile to men.  
All is troubled  
in this earthly kingdom,  
the tide of fate  
turns the world under the heavens.  
Here is wealth fleeting.  
Here are companions fleeting.  
Here is man himself fleeting.  
Here is kinsman fleeting.  
Every foundation of this world  
becomes void and vain.  

So spoke the wise one in his mind.  
He sat apart in thought.  
Good is he who holds onto his faith,  
and a warrior must never speak  
the grievances of his heart too quickly,  
unless he already knows the cure.  
A hero must act with conviction.  
Good is he who seeks mercy,  
the Father's grace in Heaven,  
where permanence stands for us all.  